 I cover three different ways of installing Linux
and step you through each process:
■ Installing from a Live CD — A Linux Live CD is a single, read-only disk that contains
everything you need to start a Linux operating system. With the Live CD, you can totally
ignore your computer's hard disk; in fact, you can run a Live CD on a system with no
hard disk. Once you are running the CD live, some Live CDs enable you to launch an
application that permanently installs the contents of the Live CD to your hard disk
■ Installing from an installation DVD — An installation DVD that is available with
Fedora, RHEL, and other Linux distributions offers more fl exible ways of installing
Linux. In particular, instead of just copying the whole Live CD contents to your
computer, with an installation DVD you can choose exactly which software package you
want. The second installation procedure I show in this chapter steps you through an
installation process from a Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6 installation DVD.
■ Installing in the enterprise — Sitting in front of a computer and clicking through
installation questions isn't too inconvenient if you are installing a single system
what if you need to install dozens or hundreds of Linux systems? What if you
want to install those systems in particular ways that need to be repeated over
multiple installations? The last section of this chapter describes effi cient ways
of installing multiple Linux systems, using network installation features and
kickstart fi les.



The following procedure steps you through the process of installing the Fedora Live CD
described in Chapter 1 to your local computer. 194-198


Installing Red Hat Enterprise Linux from Installation
Media 199 - 202

Installing Linux in the Enterprise
If you were managing dozens, hundreds, even thousands of Linux systems in a large
enterprise, it would be terribly ineffi cient to have to go to each computer to type and click
through each installation. Fortunately, with Red Hat Enterprise Linux and other distributions, you can automate installation in such a way that all you need to do is turn on a
computer and boot from the computer's network interface card to get your desired Linux
installation

Installing Linux to run virtually
Using virtualization technology, such as KVM, VMWare, VirtualBox, or Xen, you can
confi gure your computer to run multiple operating systems simultaneously. Typically,
you have a host operating system running (such as your Linux or Windows desktop),
and then confi gure guest operating systems to run within that environment.

Partitioning hard drives
The hard disk (or disks) on your computer provide the permanent storage area for your
data fi les, applications programs, and the operating system itself. Partitioning is the act
of dividing a disk into logical areas that can be worked with separately.

Understanding different partition types
Many Linux distributions give you the option of selecting different partition types when
you partition your hard disk during installation. Partition types include:
■ Linux partitions — Use this option to create a partition for an ext2, ext3, or ext4
fi lesystem type that is added directly to a partition on your hard disk (or other
storage medium).
■ LVM partitions — Create an LVM partition if you plan to create or add to an
LVM volume group. LVMs give you more fl exibility in growing, shrinking, and
moving partitions later than regular partitions do.
■ RAID partitions — Create two or more RAID partitions to create a RAID array.
These partitions should be on separate disks to create an effective RAID array.
RAID arrays can help improve performance, reliability, or both as those features
relate to reading, writing, and storing your data.
■ Swap partitions — Create a swap partition to extend the amount of virtual
memory available on your system.

Reasons for different partitioning schemes
Different opinions exist as to how to divide up a hard disk. Here are some issues to
consider:
■ Do you want to install another operating system? If you want Windows on
your computer along with Linux, you need at least one Windows (Win95, FAT16,
VFAT, or NTFS type), one Linux (Linux ext4), and usually one Linux swap
partition.
■ Is it a multiuser system? If you are using the system yourself, you probably don’t
need many partitions. One reason for partitioning an operating system is to keep
the entire system from running out of disk space at once. That also serves to
put boundaries on what an individual can use up in his or her home directory
(although disk quotas provide a more refi ned way of limiting disk use).
■ Do you have multiple hard disks? You need at least one partition per hard
disk. If your system has two hard disks, you may assign one to / and one to
/home (if you have lots of users) or /var (if the computer is a server sharing
lots of data). With a separate /home partition, you can install another Linux
system in the future without disturbing your home directories (and presumably
all or most of your user data).







































